Adding details to Conformance GEP (#937)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/geps/gep-917.md

# GEP-917: Gateway API Conformance Testing

* Issue: [#917](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/917)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

> This GEP outlines the principles and overarching structure that Gateway API will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This GEP outlines the principles and overarching structure that Gateway API
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

lock in the behavior of that feature, and there will be a mechanism for implementations
to tell the testing framework what extended fields they support.

## Testing framework

Conformance tests will initially be structured as a CLI that runs on existing
Kubernetes clusters. This may be expanded to include a testing library that can
be imported by implementations. This tool will output test results in a
structured format that can be used to generate reports. Where possible it will

> share code with the existing ingress-controller-conformance test suite.

Reviewer 2: For your considerations: while I think a CLI is good in any case, I think structuring this as a Kubernetes `Job` as the sort of defacto way to run this may have some merit.

Author: Agree that that's a natural extension point, but I think even a k8s job would be based around a CLI.

### Test Definitions

Each set of tests will be built around a set of YAML manifests representing
Gateway API resources. The tests will focus on how they expect a given
controller to process those resources, configured via GatewayClass name. For
example, tests may check to ensure that a controller correctly populates status,
or that a request is appropriately routed to the desired backend with any

> relevant modifications.

Reviewer 2: This vaguely reminds me of https://github.com/kudobuilder/kuttl, which I worked on with some friends at a previous job. While I don't necessarily suggest we use `kuttl` itself it might be worth reviewing it for ideas and influences if nothing else.

Author: Thanks! I took a look at kuttl and it has some pretty great patterns. I think our conformance tests will need to be somewhat more complex, specifically making potentially advanced requests and ensuring their responses match what we'd expect. This does seem like a great reference point for any of our tests that will start with a set of Kubernetes resources and expect status to be populated in a specific way.

Each test definition will include the following:

* Name
* Description
* Support Level

In the future, this will be expanded to include:

* Docs URL
* Function to determine feature enablement

> ### Prepopulated Gateways

Reviewer 2: FWIW I'm personally in favor of calling these "unmanaged" gateways as I feel that language is more clear at a glance.

Author: Although "unmanaged" makes sense for the most common use case here, I think "prepopulated" is a bit more broad here. For example, some implementations may have very slow provisioning, or some manual steps during initial provisioning followed by automated updates afterwards. What this is really referring to is the ability for implementations to prepopulate Gateways, for any reason, when running conformance tests.

> Some implementations of Gateway API are not able to provision arbitrary Gateways
> and instead are deployed with a 1:1 relationship to a Gateway. To ensure that

Reviewer 2: While it's basically a nitpick, I think the language here about ability might not be necessary because there's implementations like Istio which have the ability but also support "unmanaged" gateways.

My thoughts:
```suggestion
Some implementations of Gateway API support unmanaged `Gateway` resources 
that refer to an underlying server that was created by other means (e.g. `Helm`)
rather than provisioning and managing the server according to the `Gateway`
resource. To ensure that
```

Author: Good clarification - updated.
